
Intro
Hi everyone, and welcome to the final workshop of the day! I’d like to thank my fellow NDSR cohort members for all their hard work today, and our fellow presenters for their wise words on the topics of grant funding, bag-it, and web archiving. I’m going to try to keep things light and upbeat, and try to only talk for about 25-30 minutes, which will leave time for questions and a little wrap up at the end of the day before we begin our cocktail hour.

When I initially planned this workshop, I thought I might do something that was more hands on, and involved some basic scripting skills using the open source tool ffmpeg. However, when we learned about the number of people that had registered, I felt that a workshop of that type would be really difficult. The range of skillsets and knowledge would be all over the place, and it would be hard to offer help or assistance to all of you in the event that you encountered technical difficulties, in addition to providing instruction. Furthermore, not everyone attending is versed in audio visual lingo, or necessarily deals with audio visual collections. So, instead, what I’d like to do is talk a little bit about video and the components that make up a digital video file, introduce some open source software for working with audiovisual materials, and demo and explain a bash script to create a simple archival information package. 

My approach for the workshop is to talk about both tools and frameworks to use when approaching audio visual materials, and I’m hoping to present information in an accessible way, in particular for those that may not have prior or in depth knowledge of audio visual materials, and I encourage questions at the end or later on if you go on to try these tools at your institution! For me, when I started to work with audio visual resources, there was so much that was confusing or unclear about how materials and workflows were described, and while audiovisual material certainly has its challenges, it is possible to learn and gain comfort with the format. What I hope you gain from this workshop is a sense that processing and preserving audio visual materials is possible, even with very little means. You don’t need an expensive media or digital asset management system to begin organizing, describing, and preserving your audio visual files. I take a lot of inspiration from the digital POWRR folks, and believe that starting the process of digital preservation is the most important, and that just doing what you can if good enough digital preservation. 

The structure of this is going to follow something like this: I’m going to talk a little bit about formats, containers, and codecs, and the differences between analog video that has been digitized, born digital video, and how to think about preservation masters and derivative copies. Then I’m going to show you a little script that I wrote which will create a really simple archival information package (i’ll also introduce that concept) that contains the original file, an access copy, and descriptive and technical metadata. The script will be available on github, so you can download it and modify it yourself if you’d like. I’ll break down each part of the script, in the hopes of making it clear what it is doing, in non-technical terms. 

Formats, Containers/Wrappers, and Codecs
Video is created in a variety of ways, and there are many components to an audio visual file. I should say that my examples aren’t exhaustive, as there isn’t enough time, nor do I have the knowledge to talk about the multitude of types of audio visual materials.

Analog media/video carriers:
One way that video is created is through the recording of a video signal onto a carrier, such as a tape. There are lots of different types of tapes, you might be most familiar with VHS, but there are a wide variety of formats that you could encounter based on the archival setting you’re in- at CUNY TV where my residency is, we have UMatic, Betacam SP and SX primarily. Depending on how old your collection is, or what types of contents were being created, you may encounter open reel tapes in different sizes (early side of video), Umatic, VHS, hi8, dv, and even audiovisual content stored on optical media such as DVDs. If you have analog media, changes are you’re going to want to migrate the contents on the carrier to a digital file. This can be done through using a playback machine, or deck, a device that captures the signal from the deck and software that converts that signal to a digital file. There are some open source solutions to the software side of things, but unfortunately decks and the devices that capture signals are expensive and sometimes hard to find. Some institutions build their own in-house digitization set-ups, and others receive grants or institutional funds to work with vendors for digitization. A commonly cited figure is that most analog media formats will be unplayable in about 20 years, due to the lack of available hardware to playback media. 

Digital Video:
Most video currently is created and stored digitally. From the short videos we create with our mobile devices, to higher quality production video, there are numerous ways to create born digital video. You can receive video in many different formats. Digital video files contain video data and a wrapper or container, which is metadata about the video file, and the video data itself. [maybe open video file in hex editor to show?] 
A wrapper or container is important, as it communicates with the video player on your operating system, and it also contains metadata about the video file, and is expressed through the file extension (is this true?) [show output of container metadata?]
Some common containers or wrappers are .avi, which stands for audio video interleave, and is associated with the windows operating system, .mov (which is part of QuickTime) and is associated with the Mac operating system. There’s also .mkv (matroska) and .mxf (material exchange format) which are both playable on both Mac and Windows operating systems.  
There are benefits to choosing some containers over others, including whether or not the container is still actively developed or if it is an open specification, what operating system you use, and whether the codec is widely in use by others. For example, the .avi codec is no longer actively developed, and is typically very buggy. 

In addition to wrappers, there’s also the video’s codec. This is one of those video terms when I first started working with video where I was like.. what does this even mean?! I’m no longer ashamed to say I confused codec with container all the time at first… and honestly, it is confusing! A video codec is … There are many different codecs, and one way you might hear them referred to is lossy or lossless. This description has to do with the amount of video data that is kept or lost through compression of the file. An uncompressed codec means that none of the video data is compressed, and it is considered the standard for preservation master files. however, this also means that the file size of the video is quite large, and this isn’t typically a sustainable solution for many archives, as larger video sizes mean the need for more storage, which is ultimately more expensive. If you aren’t able to handle using an uncompressed codec, there is another option. A codec that has lossless compression is smaller in size than an uncompressed codec, and loss less means that although the data is compressed, there is no loss of important data (come up with better definition of lossless). Some lossless codecs are FFV1 version 3, JPEG2000, and ProRes. Similar to wrappers or containers, there are some benefits to choosing one codec over another, including openness, wide use, and whether or not the particular codec is known to produce artifacts from the compression process that result in playback errors of the video files. 

Finally, something else to consider about digital video files is their bit depth. Bit depth is the resolution quality of the video. there’s 10 bit, which is the highest quality (and contributes to a larger file size, and 8 bit, which is slightly smaller but also of a slightly lower quality. 

So, when you’re working with video files, these are all factors to consider. Typically, when you’re digitizing (or having a vendor digitize), or working with a production unit that is exporting video from an editing software, you can specify which container, codec, and bit depth you’d like to use, among many other options as well. If you can’t though, there are work arounds. This leads me to my next section, which is talking about the open source software ffmpeg. 

ffmpeg 
ffmpeg is an open source software that is used to decode and encode audio visual files. You can use ffmpeg to transcode from one format to another. ffmpeg can be used from the command line, but if you prefer a graphical user interface, I recommend the open source software handbrake. ffmpeg can be complicated to begin using because of the multitude of options within an ffmpeg command. I’d like to refer everyone to an amazing resource called ffimprovisr, which is a site that has some sample ffmpeg commands, with explanations of what each component does. the basic structure of an ffmpeg command goes something like this: 
ffmpeg (calling the software)
-i (signifying that the input video file will follow the -i)
input (your video file)
flags (options that dictate what the software is going to do to the file input)
output (the resulting file and its location)

We’re going to use ffmpeg in our script to create our access copy, and here’s the command that we’ll use: 


The other pieces of open source software we’re going to use in our packaging script are metadata-related. We’ll use media info and dcxml to acquire technical metadata about our files. 

ok, that was a lot of information. As I’ve mentioned, I’ve tried to compile as many resources as I could on our symposium’s github page, along with the text of this presentation,so that you can refer back to it and learn more at your own pace. 

So the script that I’m going to demonstrate is written in a language called bash, which only works in Mac operating systems, but is coming to windows soon. I think you could rewrite this script in a language that is compatible for macs, but I don’t know those languages, so I can’t really help you. 

I wrote the script thinking about the OAIS model, which stands for Open Archival Information System. OAIS is a standard used in digital preservation 

(NEED TO TALK ABOUT STORAGE)
